Add volto-slate upgrade guide (#3508)
plone/volto: docs/source/upgrade-guide/index.md

## Upgrading to Volto 16.x.x

### `volto-slate` is now core

> From Volto 16.0.0-alpha.15 onwards, `volto-slate` is integrated into Volto core and enabled by default. This means that the default text block is now called `slate` and the former/deprecated text block `text` based on `draftJS` is now restricted (hidden) and enforced on Volto bootstrap. This is a major change and should be planned in advance before you install any version of the alphas after 16.0.0-alpha.15.

Reviewer: In the future, please use one sentence per line, per Plone documentation guidelines. It makes reviews and diffs a little easier.

I would like to start using standard Sphinx admonitions regarding features going forward as well. The admonitions are `versionadded`, `versionchanged`, and `deprecated`. See them in action in a theme on which ours is based:

https://sphinx-themes.org/sample-sites/furo/kitchen-sink/admonitions/#versionadded

The phrase "is now restricted (hidden) and enforced on Volto bootstrap." seems contradictory to itself. How can it be both restricted and enforced (implies it is required)? As such, I revised that sentence to what I think you intend.

````suggestion
From Volto 16.0.0-alpha.15 onwards, `volto-slate` is integrated into Volto core and enabled as the default text block.
The previous text block `text` based on `draftJS` is now deprecated and is restricted (hidden) in Volto bootstrap.
This is a major change and should be planned in advance before you install 16.0.0-alpha.15 or later.

```{versionadded} 16.0.0-alpha.15
`volto-slate` added to Volto core as the default text block.
```

```{deprecated} 16.0.0-alpha.15
`text` text block based on `draftJS` is now deprecated and might be removed from core in a future major version.
```
````

> ````{note}

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```{note}
````

> Volto 16 is intended to be the LTS version used when Plone 6 Final is released. Volto 16 will ensure be compatible with all existing Volto deployments and won't introduce any hard breaking change. So, you'll have the choice to continue using `draftJS` text block in your projects. See below for more information.

Reviewer: This is not true because it means all versions of Volto. Please add a restriction with a version number:

"Volto 16 will ensure compatibility with all existing Volto deployments"

```suggestion
Volto 16 is intended to be the long-term support (LTS) version used when Plone 6 Final is released.
Volto 16 will ensure compatibility with all existing Volto deployments for versions XXX and won't introduce any hard breaking change.
As such you will have the choice to continue using `draftJS` text block in your projects.
See below for more information.
```

> ````

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
````

```{important}
From Volto 16 on, `draftJS` is deprecated and might be removed from core in next major versions.

> ```

Reviewer: Delete this `important` admonition, as I moved its content into the `deprecated` directive above.

These are the possible scenarios:

- New projects

> - Existing projects, already using `volto-slate` addon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Existing projects, already using `volto-slate` add-on
```

- Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to continue using `draftJS`
- Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to start using `slate` without migrating (possible, but not recommended)
- Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to migrate to `slate`

> ### New projects

Reviewer: Need to make these next 5 headings one more level deeper.

```suggestion
#### New projects
```

> New projects are unaffected, since they will use slate as default text block from the beginning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New projects are unaffected, since they will use Slate as the default text block from the beginning.
```

> ### Existing projects, already using `volto-slate` addon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Existing projects, already using `volto-slate` add-on
```

> For those projects using already `volto-slate` they should follow these steps in your project configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For projects already using `volto-slate`, take the following steps in your project configuration:
```

> - Remove `volto-slate` add-on from your project build dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove `volto-slate` add-on from your project build dependencies.
```

> - Add these lines to the jest config in your project `package.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add these lines to the Jest configuration in your project's `package.json`:
```

Reviewer: Does the user need to substitute `<rootDir>` with their rootDir value? If so, then let's explicitly state that:

```
- Add these lines to the Jest configuration in your project's `package.json`, substituting the project's root directory for `<rootDir>`:
```

Author: It's fine like this, it does a var interpolation internally.

```diff
--- a/package.json
+++ b/package.json
@@ -57,6 +57,7 @@
       "^.+\\.js(x)?$": "babel-jest",
       "^.+\\.css$": "jest-css-modules",
       "^.+\\.scss$": "jest-css-modules",
+      "^.+\\.less$": "jest-css-modules",
       "^.+\\.(png)$": "jest-file",
       "^.+\\.(jpg)$": "jest-file",
       "^.+\\.(svg)$": "./node_modules/@plone/volto/jest-svgsystem-transform.js"
@@ -67,6 +68,7 @@
     "moduleNameMapper": {
       "@plone/volto/babel": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@plone/volto/babel",
       "@plone/volto/(.*)$": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@plone/volto/src/$1",
+      "@plone/volto-slate": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@plone/volto/packages/volto-slate/src",
```

> - If any of your code depends on `volto-slate` code, update your imports by adding `@plone/` namespace to the original `volto-slate` import.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If any of your code depends on `volto-slate` code, update your imports by adding the namespace `@plone/` to the original `volto-slate` import.
```

```diff
- import { DetachedTextBlockEditor } from 'volto-slate/blocks/Text/DetachedTextBlockEditor';
+ import { DetachedTextBlockEditor } from '@plone/volto-slate/blocks/Text/DetachedTextBlockEditor';
```

### Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to continue using `draftJS`

> You will have to configure your project to continue doing so (eg. in your `config.js` or in your add-on):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will have to configure your project to continue using `draftJS`, for example, in your `config.js` or in your add-on:
```

```js
config.settings.defaultBlockType = 'slate'
config.blocks.blocksConfig.table.restricted = false;
config.blocks.blocksConfig.slateTable.restricted = true;
```

### Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to start using `slate` without migrating (possible, but not recommended)

> Still a valid option specially if you don't have budget for it, the old content based on the legacy `text` block will be still be functional. New blocks in new content will be created with new `slate` block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Still a valid option, especially if you don't have the budget for it, the old content based on the legacy `text` block will be still be functional.
New text blocks in new content will be created with the new `slate` text block.
```

It is recommended to go the extra mile and migrate the `text` blocks to `slate` blocks for maximum future compatibility.

### Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to migrate to `slate`

> Using the `blocks-conversion-tool`. See https://github.com/plone/blocks-conversion-tool for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `blocks-conversion-tool`.
See https://github.com/plone/blocks-conversion-tool for more information.
```

## Upgrading to Volto 16.x.x

### `volto-slate` is now core

From Volto 16.0.0-alpha.15 onwards, `volto-slate` is integrated into Volto core and enabled as the default text block.
The previous text block `text` based on `draftJS` is now deprecated and is restricted (hidden) in Volto bootstrap.
This is a major change and should be planned in advance before you install 16.0.0-alpha.15 or later.

```{versionadded} 16.0.0-alpha.15
`volto-slate` added to Volto core as the default text block.
```

```{deprecated} 16.0.0-alpha.15
`text` text block based on `draftJS` is now deprecated and might be removed from core in a future major version.
```

```{note}
Volto 16 is intended to be the long-term support (LTS) version used when Plone 6 Final is released.

> Volto 16 will ensure compatibility with all existing Volto deployments for versions XXX and won't introduce any hard breaking change.

Author: @stevepiercy The idea is that Volto 16 won't cut off any existing installation by forcing a complicated or hard migration. So, following upgrade guide one could upgrade a Volto deployment to Volto 16. How could we express that correctly?

Reviewer: I think I need to know what that statement means. When I do an upgrade to Volto 16, from what versions may I upgrade with an "easy" process? Is it step-wise, i.e., 13 -> 14 -> 15 -> 16, or rip the Band-Aid off 13 -> 16?

Also LTS has no relevance to upgrades or migrations. It means that a specific version is maintained longer than other versions, e.g., Volto 17 will be the bleeding edge with all the shiny toys.

Reviewer: Ah, how about "backward compatibility"? I think that is the term you seek. For example, "Volto 16 is backward compatible to version X.Y".

Author: Here, remaining to be compatible equals, draftJS is still in there, so when you upgrade you still have the option to stay with it. Nothing more. Maybe then, the statement is too grandiloquent? Since draftJS is in there since the beginning, we are not cutting any previous Volto version from being upgraded to 16.

Reviewer: Yes, "backward compatible" is too grand for this one feature.

I think we should designate a future version of Volto where draftJS is scheduled for removal. That will remove uncertainty and nudge the reticent developer to migrate to Slate. draftJS will not be supported forever in core Volto.

As far as what is happening with the text block in the docs, let's keep it simple.

- Slate is the new default text block.
- DraftJS is deprecated.
- DraftJS will be supported until ____?
- Developers are strongly encouraged to migrate existing DraftJS sites to Slate.

Author: @stevepiercy what about now?

Reviewer: This is much improved. Oh shit you just merged it while I was reviewing it.

Reviewer: Resolved in https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/3529

@@ -57,6 +57,7 @@
       "^.+\\.js(x)?$": "babel-jest",
       "^.+\\.css$": "jest-css-modules",
       "^.+\\.scss$": "jest-css-modules",
+      "^.+\\.less$": "jest-css-modules",
       "^.+\\.(png)$": "jest-file",
       "^.+\\.(jpg)$": "jest-file",
       "^.+\\.(svg)$": "./node_modules/@plone/volto/jest-svgsystem-transform.js"
@@ -67,6 +68,7 @@
     "moduleNameMapper": {
       "@plone/volto/babel": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@plone/volto/babel",
       "@plone/volto/(.*)$": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@plone/volto/src/$1",
+      "@plone/volto-slate": "<rootDir>/node_modules/@plone/volto/packages/volto-slate/src",
```

- If any of your code depends on `volto-slate` code, update your imports by adding the namespace `@plone/` to the original `volto-slate` import.

```diff
- import { DetachedTextBlockEditor } from 'volto-slate/blocks/Text/DetachedTextBlockEditor';
+ import { DetachedTextBlockEditor } from '@plone/volto-slate/blocks/Text/DetachedTextBlockEditor';
```

### Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to continue using `draftJS`

You will have to configure your project to continue using `draftJS`, for example, in your `config.js` or in your add-on:

```js

> config.settings.defaultBlockType = 'slate'

Reviewer 2: @sneridagh This should be `config.settings.defaultBlockType = 'text'` if they want to continue using draftjs ?

Author: Good catch! Fixed!

## Upgrading to Volto 16.x.x

### `volto-slate` is now core

From Volto 16.0.0-alpha.15 onwards, `volto-slate` is integrated into Volto core and enabled as the default text block.
The previous text block `text` based on `draftJS` is now deprecated and is restricted (hidden) in Volto bootstrap.
This is a major change and should be planned in advance before you install 16.0.0-alpha.15 or later.

```{versionadded} 16.0.0-alpha.15
`volto-slate` added to Volto core as the default text block.
```

```{deprecated} 16.0.0-alpha.15
`text` text block based on `draftJS` is now deprecated and will be removed from core in Volto 18.

> ```

Reviewer: Is there a roadmap for removal of `draftJS` in a future version of Plone, such as Plone 6.2 or 7.0, or is it "whatever version number of Plone is at whenever we release Volto 18"?

Reviewer: See https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/3529

```{note}
Volto 16 is intended to be the long-term support (LTS) version used when Plone 6 Final is released.

> Volto 16 supports `draftJS` text block deployments but please notice it's deprecated from this version on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although `draftJS` text block deployments are now deprecated, they are supported in Volto 16, will be supported in Volto 17, but will be removed in Volto 18.
```

Reviewer: Resolved in https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/3529

> As such you will have the choice to continue using `draftJS` text block in your projects but developers and integrators are strongly encouraged to migrate existing sites using `draftJS` text blocks to migrate to `Slate` text blocks.

Reviewer: One minor detail. When we use "Slate" that means a proper noun or the product named Slate. When we use "`slate`", that is the text block. I missed this distinction on my first pass.

```suggestion
As such, you are strongly encouraged to migrate existing sites that use `draftJS` text blocks to `slate` text blocks.
```

Reviewer: Resolved in https://github.com/plone/volto/pull/3529

See below for more information.
```

These are the possible scenarios:

- New projects
- Existing projects, already using `volto-slate` add-on
- Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to continue using `draftJS`
- Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to start using `slate` without migrating (possible, but not recommended)
- Existing projects using core `draftJS`, opting to migrate to `slate`

#### New projects

> New projects are unaffected, since they will use Slate as the default text block from the beginning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New projects are unaffected, since they will use `slate` as the default text block from the beginning.
```
